.github/CI_README.md, before:

GitHub CI for the IC Repo

## Using custom CI labels
Note that setting custom CI logic via the pull request title has been deprecated and we now use labels instead. See labels below for custom logic that can be enabled:

* `CI_ALL_BAZEL_TARGETS`: runs all bazel targets and uploads them to s3.
* `CI_OVERRIDE_DIDC_CHECK`: skips the backwards compatibility didc checks.
* `CI_OVERRIDE_BUF_BREAKING`: skips the backwards compatibility protobuf checks.

Adding a label alone will not trigger CI, you will need to retrigger it by either opening & closing the PR or adding an empty commit with `git commit -m 'retrigger CI' --allow-empty`.

## Adding a new CI workflow
If your workflow is not complex, simply add the workflow to the `workflows` directory. See existing examples. If your workflow is more complex, see Generating CI yaml files below/

## Generating CI yaml files
Due to some limitations of GitHub Actions CI, we need to generate our own CI yaml files for our more complex pipelines. This is so we can use yaml anchors and re-use the same job setup. To add a new generated workflow:

1. Add your new workflow to `workflow-source`. Include any anchors you would like to use under the block `anchors`. If you name it something else, it will break.
1. Push your changes to GitHub which will trigger CI. This will automatically run a custom script (`generate-ci.py`) which will generate the full yaml file from your anchors, as well as delete the `anchors` block, as this will not work for github actions. This new yaml file will automatically be placed in the `workflows` directory.
1. Check that this new workflow file is correct.

## Using GitHub Apps in CI
Our CI contains several automated steps to either generate commits or PRs, usually for linting or version updates. Previously we used Personal Access Tokens generated by a service account to create a commit or PR with the correct permissions but we have now moved to GitHub apps. These have several benefits:
- they generate a token which is only valid while the workflow is running, enhancing security and removing the need for regular rotation
- they can be managed via the organization and do not require a separate service account
- they can be installed on mutliple repos, however they only have access to the repo they are installed in

## Automated PRs by Bots
To increase security and prevent a bot from accidentally changing files that it shouldn't, we are introducing a new config file stored in `.github/repo_policies/bot_approved_files.json` in all public repos where any files changed by a bot must be listed. If not, the workflow will fail and the PR can't be merged.

Workflow defined in: https://github.com/dfinity/public-workflows/blob/main/.github/workflows/repo_policies.yml

Commit message:

chore(IDX): remove outdated CI info (#7945)
This clean up the .github/CI_README.md file to remove outdated
information.

.github/CI_README.md, after:

GitHub CI for the IC Repo

## Using custom CI labels
CI labels trigger various behavior. You can reference the labels that start with `CI_` and see available options.

Adding a label alone will not trigger CI, you will need to retrigger it by either opening & closing the PR or adding an empty commit with `git commit -m 'retrigger CI' --allow-empty`.

## Using GitHub Apps in CI
Our CI contains several automated steps to either generate commits or PRs, usually for linting or version updates. Previously we used Personal Access Tokens generated by a service account to create a commit or PR with the correct permissions but we have now moved to GitHub apps. These have several benefits:
- they generate a token which is only valid while the workflow is running, enhancing security and removing the need for regular rotation
- they can be managed via the organization and do not require a separate service account
- they can be installed on mutliple repos, however they only have access to the repo they are installed in

## Automated PRs by Bots
To increase security and prevent a bot from accidentally changing files that it shouldn't, we are introducing a new config file stored in `.github/repo_policies/bot_approved_files.json` in all public repos where any files changed by a bot must be listed. If not, the workflow will fail and the PR can't be merged.

Workflow defined in: https://github.com/dfinity/public-workflows/blob/main/.github/workflows/repo_policies.yml
